



Media Over QUIC                                                   Y. Cui
Internet-Draft                                                     C. Ma
Intended status: Informational                       Tsinghua University
Expires: 7 September 2023                                         H. Shi
                                                                  Huawei
                                                                  W. Cao
                                                            6 March 2023


        MoQ relay for support of deadline-aware media transport
                 draft-ma-moq-relay-for-deadline-latest

Abstract

   This document defines MoQ relay's behavior to provide deliver-before-
   deadline media transport.  This memo intends to introduce deadline-
   aware operations to the MoQ relay to decrease end-to-end latency in
   real-time media transmission.

About This Document

   This note is to be removed before publishing as an RFC.

   Status information for this document may be found at
   https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-ma-moq-relay-for-deadline/.

   Source for this draft and an issue tracker can be found at
   https://github.com/simonkorl/draft-moq-for-deadline.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on 7 September 2023.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2023 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents (https://trustee.ietf.org/
   license-info) in effect on the date of publication of this document.
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.  Code Components
   extracted from this document must include Revised BSD License text as
   described in Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are
   provided without warranty as described in the Revised BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction
   2.  Conventions and Definitions
   3.  Design Requirements
     3.1.  Support Different Relay Topology and Architecture
     3.2.  Block-base Transport
     3.3.  Metadata
     3.4.  Clock Synchronization
   4.  Deadline-aware Action of Relay
     4.1.  Deadline-aware Scheduling and Cancelling
     4.2.  Optional: Deadline-aware Redundancy Coding
   5.  Other Design Considerations
     5.1.  Drop Notification
     5.2.  Data Buffer
   6.  Security Considerations
   7.  IANA Considerations
   8.  References
     8.1.  Normative References
     8.2.  Informative References
   Acknowledgments
   Authors' Addresses

1.  Introduction

   Media over QUIC (MoQ) aims at building a system to better support
   real-time media transport like live streaming, online meeting, remote
   desktop, etc.  These use cases usually require that their data is
   received before a certain time i.e. deadline.  For example, a video
   conference application generally requires the end-to-end delay to be
   below human perception (about 100ms), to enable smooth interaction
   among participants.  In such a system, the buffer will only hold the
   latest stream data and will drop the overdue data because the system
   will never use it.

   Deadline-aware actions, such as passing deadline-related information
   from the endpoint to the relay and deadline-aware scheduling on relay
   nodes will increase the timeliness of data and decrease the cost of
   bandwidth.  These mechanisms are tested in Deadline-aware Transport
   Protocol ([I-D.draft-shi-quic-dtp-07]) and results show that
   deadline-aware actions can stop sending outdated data, prioritize
   urgent data and prevent useless re-transmission, decrease data
   queuing time, and increase punctuality of data.  Deadline-aware
   scheduling can also provide a better overall user experience while
   serving clients with different delay requirements.  For example, a
   relay may simultaneously forward a simple live stream and an online
   meeting stream.  The live stream may tolerate a 1s delay while the
   online meeting only accepts a 100ms delay.  It may be a good idea to
   forward the meeting stream first.

   MoQ relays can benefit from deadline-aware actions and provide a
   better user experience.  MoQ relays with deadline-aware actions can
   better schedule stream data to decrease queuing time, and prevent
   waste of re-transmission of overdue data to further decrease end-to-
   end delay.  MoQ relays can also use deadline-related information to
   develop better data delivery strategies to increase overall user
   experience.

   This document proposes Deadline-aware MoQ Relay to provide deliver-
   before-deadline transmission on MoQ relay nodes by using deadline-
   aware actions such as scheduling, data canceling, and redundancy
   coding.  This relay design can act as an extension of a basic MoQ
   relay standard to provide better support to transmit media data in
   time.

2.  Conventions and Definitions

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and
   "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in
   BCP 14 [RFC2119] [RFC8174] when, and only when, they appear in all
   capitals, as shown here.

3.  Design Requirements

3.1.  Support Different Relay Topology and Architecture

   Deadline-aware MoQ Relay SHOULD support different relay topologies
   like those mentioned in
   [I-D.draft-shi-moq-design-space-analysis-of-moq-00].  For different
   relay topology, there may exist different architecture.  The
   deadline-aware feature should be easily implemented as a plugin
   regardless of the architecture and topology.

3.2.  Block-base Transport

   Deadline-aware MoQ Relay SHOULD support block-based transport.  A
   block is a basic, atomic data unit in the MoQ system that can be used
   independently at an endpoint like a video frame.  The endpoint and
   relay SHOULD mark the boundary of a data block in some ways and
   inform the relays.

3.3.  Metadata

   Deadline-aware MoQ Relay needs some metadata of the data block to
   enable deadline-aware actions.  The endpoint and relay SHOULD attach
   the following metadata to each data block.

   *  size: the size of the data block in bytes

   *  priority: the global priority of the block in an unsigned integer

   *  deadline: the expected latency of the data.  Relay is allowed to
      drop overdue data.  Usually measured in milliseconds.

   *  start timestamp: the Unix timestamp when the block is created

   Relays SHOULD keep track of the metadata of all the blocks it
   receives until the block misses its deadline.

   Relays MAY synchronize the metadata of blocks with each other when
   necessary.

3.4.  Clock Synchronization

   To support precise deadline-aware action, all the endpoints and
   relays SHOULD do clock synchronization.

4.  Deadline-aware Action of Relay

4.1.  Deadline-aware Scheduling and Cancelling

   Deadline-aware MoQ Relay can use the information of cached data,
   block priority, deadline, and others to make stream-level scheduling.
   The scheduler SHOULD try to minimize the total time of queuing and
   try to meet the deadline requirements of as many blocks as possible.

   In some cases where the data can be partially accepted, Deadline-
   aware MoQ Relay MAY cancel some blocks.  The relays MAY inform the
   endpoints and other relays about the drop of these data blocks.

4.2.  Optional: Deadline-aware Redundancy Coding

   Deadline-aware MoQ Relay MAY add redundancy data to blocks when the
   block is close to its deadline or the loss rate of the network
   increases.  This helps to prevent the block from being re-transmitted
   and decreases latency.  When the first relay encodes the data with
   redundancy coding, the following nodes may benefit from it.

   If redundancy coding is enabled, every relay node SHOULD implement an
   encoder and decoder according to the redundancy coding method.  The
   endpoint MAY implement the redundancy encoder and decoder to fully
   utilize the relay's redundancy coding function.

   The first relay node that encodes the data SHOULD add redundancy-
   related information in the metadata of the data block.  The last
   relay before the receiver endpoint should decode the data and forward
   it to the endpoint unless the endpoint can decode the data itself.

5.  Other Design Considerations

5.1.  Drop Notification

   When a relay drops a data block due to missing of deadline or other
   reasons, it might be useful to send an explicit dropping message to
   other relays and the endpoint to inform them about an active loss of
   data.

5.2.  Data Buffer

   The relay may buffer some data during forwarding.  These data blocks
   may be used for re-transmission, serving users with larger delay
   tolerance and other usages.  However, whether and how should we
   implement such a buffer still need further discussion.

6.  Security Considerations

   The metadata, and control message of the Deadlind-aware MoQ Relay
   should only be accessed by selected relays.  The relay SHOULD NOT
   decrypt the content of the data block.

7.  IANA Considerations

   This document has no IANA actions.

8.  References

8.1.  Normative References

   [I-D.draft-shi-quic-dtp-07]
              Cui, Y., Ma, C., Shi, H., Zheng, K., and W. Wang,
              "Deadline-aware Transport Protocol", Work in Progress,
              Internet-Draft, draft-shi-quic-dtp-07, 26 January 2023,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-shi-quic-dtp-
              07>.

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC2119, March 1997,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc2119>.

   [RFC8174]  Leiba, B., "Ambiguity of Uppercase vs Lowercase in RFC
              2119 Key Words", BCP 14, RFC 8174, DOI 10.17487/RFC8174,
              May 2017, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8174>.

8.2.  Informative References

   [I-D.draft-shi-moq-design-space-analysis-of-moq-00]
              Shi, H. and Y. Cui, "Design Space Analysis of MoQ", Work
              in Progress, Internet-Draft, draft-shi-moq-design-space-
              analysis-of-moq-00, 21 October 2022,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-shi-moq-
              design-space-analysis-of-moq-00>.

Acknowledgments

   TODO acknowledge.

Authors' Addresses

   Yong Cui
   Tsinghua University
   30 Shuangqing Rd
   Beijing
   China
   Email: cuiyong@tsinghua.edu.cn


   Chuan Ma
   Tsinghua University
   30 Shuangqing Rd
   Beijing
   China
   Email: mc21@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn


   Hang Shi
   Huawei
   Email: shihang9@huawei.com


   Wei Cao
